### What are CWR and WUS?
To ensure food security, crop production must adapt to global pressures of change including a growing global population, pests and diseases, and intensifying frequency and magnitude of extreme weather.

Plants that are close relatives of crops (crop wild relatives or [CWR](https://www.cwrdiversity.org/about/what-are-crop-wild-relatives/)) have the potential to adapt crop production to these challenges. [From prehistoric to modern times](https://www.fs.fed.us/wildflowers/ethnobotany/wildrelatives.shtml), plant breeders have used CWR to adapt crop varieties through the introduction of traits linked to crop productivity and nutrition as well as resistance to environmental stress. CWR have been used to introduce such traits to crops of major global importance including tomato, corn, wheat and sunflower. CWR also offer a critical source of rootstock for woody perennial plants. Grafting of wine-grape to rootstock from North American grape CWR is credited with rescuing the global wine industry [from catostrophic spread of pests in the late 1800s](https://discoverandshare.org/2021/08/31/grafting-the-grape-american-grapevine-rootstock-in-missouri-and-the-world/) and today over 80% of vineyards grow grafted grapes.

Wild-utilized plant species (WUS) are plants that are harvested and utilized or consumed directly by humans. WUS often provide critical food security, income sources and may have cultural value, especially in [Indigenous food systems](https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/mono/10.4324/9781003054689/traditional-plant-foods-canadian-indigenous-peoples-harriet-kuhnlein-nancy-turner) and/or in rural communities. Many WUS are especially important as sources of medicine. CWR and WUS definitions are not mutually exclusive; many CWR are wild-harvested and used directly, including many berry fruits native to Canada

### Why is conservation of CWR and WUS important?
To ensure the availability of these important genetic resources for crop breeding and for continued sustainable direct use, CWR and WUS require urgent conservation attention. Globally, ~40% of wild plant species including many CWR and WUS are threatened by extinction. Over 90% of studies that have examined genetic diversity of CWR wild-populations have documented and/or predict future [loss of within-species genetic diversity](https://nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/nph.17733). Extinction of CWR and WUS will encompass the loss of genetic variation that may be invaluable for future crop improvements.

Canadian CWR that are critically imperiled include relatives of walnut, blueberry, quinoa, amaranth, flax, chestnut, currant and gooseberry, lupin, wheat, cup-plant and proso-millet, as well as several forage and feed crops. Imperiled Canadian WUS that require urgent attention include (amongst others) soapweed-yucca, deltoid balsamroot, cherry-birch, red-mulberry and over twenty different hawthorn species, subspecies and varieties (click on the "CWR Conservation" tab and search for these relatives for more information).

### Towards an Integrative Strategy for Conservation of CWR and WUS in Canada
To understand the taxonomy and distribution of CWR and WUS in Canada we assembled [a national inventory]() of these plants. 

We next aimed to identify the baseline conservation of these important plants in <i> ex situ </i> (away from home) conservation systems; in national North American genebanks and in the national network of botanical garden collections. These <i> ex situ </i> conservation collections protect samples of the genetic diversity that is distributed among wild populations of CWR and WUS, and this is especially important for conserving the genetic diversity of those CWR and WUS that are particulalry vulnerable in their native habitats. <i> Ex situ </i> conservation also facilities distribution of these resources, connecting plant breeders with the traits and genetic diversity that is found in wild-populations. Living collections of CWR and WUS that are displayed in botanical gardens may also serve to raise broader public awareness of the values and threats to CWR and WUS.

Despite the role of <i> ex situ </i> conservation, complementation focusing on <i> in situ </i> conservation (conservation of wild-populations) is the only way to maintain diverse, healthy populations in the long-run. We encourage users of this web application to note CWR and WUS in their local regions (Click on the "Find Native CWR") that may be a focus for <i> in situ </i> conservation action, including increased protection and population monitoring. Such work should draw on coordination with diverse stakeholders and knowledgeholders including Indigenous Peoples, farmers and citizen scientists. Range maps for individual taxa (including information on baseline conservation in <i> ex situ </i> collections) can be found on the "CWR Conservation" Tab

Please feel free to share this web tool in efforts to promote broader awareness of CWR and WUS in Canada. We hope that the information presented here provides a starting point for advancing integrative conservation and sustainable use of these valuable plants.



